Belongings knows how important it is to actually to know where
everything is. Because do you either set a torch to the whole thing, or do you
find the treasure? Without that system, you can't
manage the information well. Now, we don't want surveillance, but we also
don't want information that's collected to not be able to be
managed.
Now, jumping briefly to what's happening in other parts of the
world.
In the US, there has been overreach of
taking data on lots of different systems and feeding
them into different unrelated systems so
that ICE, the immigration homeland security
group, have been arresting people on the basis of
they've entered onto a list. Currently, there's a New
Zealand-born
woman who has a green card in the US, Evalee Wehiongi,
who has been pinged partly because,
there was a record of her having potentially had a
minor criminal offense that was wiped some years
ago. With the majority of data
servers being owned by or run by American
companies, the more New Zealand data that is
put into systems that are
not under our control, the more the risk is that that
information will be taken elsewhere.
I don't think
that we can risk having vast
additional amounts of visual material that could be used as
AI training systems going into other
people, and that includes American companies' hands.
So that's a whole bundle of different things, and I'm happy to talk about
anything that's in my submissions, if there's any questions.
Yeah. We've just
got about a minute there, so we'll just open it up.
If Carl or Dan, have you got any questions of Kaye?
I suppose as an ordinary person reading this bill, it's not entirely obvious
how these powers would work day to day.
And
my question is, what are the most important details do you think are
missing that Parliament needs before passing this law?
Well, for any type of data collection, you need to have
storage and retention and deletion policies.
You also need to have ability to know how to access it.
So for example,
if at some stage there was web cameras on police,
can people access that as well? Can people get photos
that have been taken of themselves?
How easy would that be to be? How can we be sure
also that there is training in
not being preemptively...
We want intelligence, not surveillance.
We don't want a police constable on the court saying, "Oh, I took
those photos, Your Honor, because they looked suspicious." Talking
about a group of young Maori and, the whole
appearance of racism, even if that is not the motivation,
is something that in some communities lessens the
ability of communities to trust and cooperate with
the police. And what we want as an outcome is
a safer Aotearoa with communities actually
sort of saying, "It's that guy." Like in my community group, we've
got, currently there's somebody who takes their dog for walks, doesn't
have dog bags, and there's people are
tagging them saying, "This is a problem." And people are saying, "Does
anyone have webcams that might capture this so we might be able to track
down and let the council deal with it?" But at the same time, it's like not
trying to be evil or beat up the guy.
It's trying to find a safe way of dealing with a public nuisance.
And the police should be dealing with more things than just public nuisance.
Not who's tagging that
wall at the local park, but actually who's breaking into cars,
who's
sort of attacking the local dairy or whatever.
We want it proportioned, and we want cooperation, and this does
not have enough safeguards for people to feel that they will be trusting the
police.
Okay, Kaye. Thank you. I think Carl possibly had a question.
Yeah.
But has that answered that for you, Carl?
Yeah, I think I know you've got to move on chair, so that's okay.
Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you very much for your submission today-
Thank you
... Kaye. Thank you. Our next submitter is by Zoom, Alexandra Kerr.
So we'll just wait for Alexandra.
Alexandra, are you there? We're looking at a keyboard at the moment.
Maybe if you could turn the
camera around or if you could speak. That's better.
Just up a little bit. Perfect. Alexandra Kerr, welcome.
You've got five minutes with us today.
We'll let you go straight into your submission.
Thank you. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can. Yes.
Okay. Because I can't actually see you.
For some reason, it's all disappeared.
I can definitely see you. We can hear you.
So, as long as you're confident there, you're-
I can make my submission. Yep. All right.
Okay, thank you very much. Obviously, this
is about the expansion of police powers.
I know that the last speaker talked a lot about data collection,
but I think this is about a general increase in police powers.
And my big concern is that,
according to the Policing Act 2008,
police are
essentially empowered to report a breach of the peace.
In other words, they are peacekeepers.
And a lot of what I see today is
going beyond that without any oversight.
And so the expansion of these powers without fur-
withoutEqual oversight to me seems
like
the beginning of a police state.
And I don't want to make remarks that sound all
dramatic without providing some sort of information, but I was
looking at a video the other day
of three police officers that stopped a lady, she was maybe
20. Nice looking thing. And then
a third car pulls over, a police officer walks over to her, he
says something to her, she obviously mouths off to him, and he
smashes her in the face and drops her.
And this video is available. I can submit it.
The sergeant on the scene, he was identified
as the sergeant, walks over.
As far as I know, no, nothing has happened of
this.
It's just all hushed up. People are treated this way.
It's coercive. I'm going to move on to another example.
I know you'd like to address that. Another example is the roadside
testing at the moment. I've always been big on bodily
autonomy. The Bill of Rights protects that right of
mine.
However, if a policeman
offers to put a reagent inside your mouth, right,
and you say, "Look, I don't want that inside my mouth.
Give me the material data
safety sheets to show that this is actually
going to be okay.
Show me the health and safety that's gone into it.
And also, could you please sign this public
questionnaire saying that you'll take personal
liability should something happen to me as a
result, like an allergic response or something like that?"
And what happens in this situation is if you refuse this test,
automatically you're fined $400, you're parked up for
12 hours, you are guilty,
and all you've done is try to exercise your
basic rights. I am not a drug taker, but I do not
intend to have anybody stick anything in my mouth.
So, that is coercive policing.
I wouldn't want to see an expansion of powers like that,
because
it's just over the top without any oversight.
You turn around, you ask for their badge number, and all of a sudden you're
seen as
some kind of,
what,
sovereign citizen or
agitator or something, and they may, in their discretion,
treat you even worse.
You may end up at the police station or something, all for the
sake of coercive police
policy in the first instance. Now, all I would
like to point out from this point on,
those two examples,
I can elaborate on them at any time, is that
we need full, accurate, and verifiable records
for all actions. We need oversight.
I've written a couple of things here.
I mean, the police-
Alexandro, what we might do, we just might see if there's any questions.
And if not, I'll give you 30 seconds to sum up.
But is Carl or Dan, any questions? So we've got no questions.
So if you, we've got 30, if you want to sum up the submission just before you
leave, please.
It's really bad that Carl has no questions.
It means my submission will be dismissed
possibly.
Look, I just want to sum up by saying that I respect the
police, I respect that there is a need for the police, and I
have friends in the police force, and I have clients in the police force,
and I certainly wouldn't disrespect them by trying to
tarnish the whole thing. However,
some of these policies are already out of whack with
oversight.
In relation to oversight,
you don't want to win this stuff in a court of law.
What happens at the roadside, what happens at
wherever it is,
the officers going in there need
to know that they
have judiciary responsibility.
Look, I-
We'll cut you there, Alexandro. Thank you very much for your submission
today, and we've got your submission also in front of us.
So thank you. Our next submitter is also by Zoom,
is the New Zealand Council for Civil
Liberties. We'll just see if we can get them online.
They're online. Thomas Spiegel, I believe, chair. Have you got Thomas?
Welcome, Thomas. You've got 10 minutes with us today.
We're in your hands.
Good afternoon. My name's Thomas Spiegel, as you said, I'm the chair of the New
Zealand Council for Civil Liberties.
Policing Amendment is such a bland name for a bill, but it's one of the
biggest grabs of police power in the nation's history.
I believe it's a radical bill, and it's a dangerous bill.
I'm not going to go through our entire submission, but I do want to talk about the
two parts of the bill and what they have in common.
Now, you may be surprised to hear that I'm going to start with police body cameras,
because I don't even know. Did you know that you're considering a bill
that provides the legal basis for the police to start using body cameras?
Because in the words of the bill, "A police employee may record, by any means,
visual images of any person or thing that is in or that can be observed."
Okay.
What was the allowable purposes this can be done for including safety,
integrity, intelligence gathering?
It's very apparent that this bill has been designed to provide the legal backing
for the use of body camerasNow,
at the NZCCL, we're aware that the Police Commissioner has stated he wants to
implement body cameras for police.
So we've been doing some research to work out how we can do it safely.
We're looking at different schemes in other countries, various requirements about
when body cameras can be worn, when they should be turned on, when they can be
turned off, who gets access to footage, et cetera.
The issues are surprisingly tricky, but I believe not insurmountable.
We also believe that the people of New Zealand, through both consultation and the
deliberations of the elected parliament, should have some say in how police
select implement body cameras. This bill just skips past all that
and says the police can record whatever they like.
Pass this law and neither the people nor you MPs will get to say
anything about body cameras at all.
Furthermore, the bill enables police or police employees in any public
place to use any tool they like in order to record audio or
video. This includes such things as high-power zoom lenses,
parabolic long-range microphones, and even more advanced technology such
as thermal imaging.
These tools allow the invasion of people's private places from public
places in a way that is incompatible with privacy, and I
believe the Search and Surveillance Act.
And it allows these tools to be left unattended and running for a long time.
The bill is a green flag to use number plate recognition, facial recognition,
live surveillance, drones, gait analysis,
cameras and microphones everywhere. Everything's allowed by this bill.
Now I want to switch to part two,
the road and any other area closure part.
This has expanded a part of the law that police can use to close roads.
It allows them to close any accessible area, which pretty well covers most of the
country.
It also expands the reasons the areas can be closed.
While the puffery at the start of the bill talks about antisocial road use, our
reading is the text that one or more of the following apply means it applies in
all of the other circumstances as well.
It seems the bill will allow police to shut down any area, remove
the people for a number of reasons, including they believe that public
disorder is imminent, or that a group of people may be expected
to cause excessive noise from a vehicle.
Now, these aren't the totality of the reasons listed, but I've picked out these
because firstly, they deal with things that haven't actually happened at the time
the order was made.
As someone who believes that people should be allowed to go about their lives
freely as much as possible, this seems very wrong to me.
Now we not only have to avoid breaking the law, we also have to make sure we don't
give the impression that we might break the law.
The second reason I've picked them out is that those descriptions also apply to
political protest.
Normal political protest in a democracy is often loud, at least
somewhat disorderly, and sometimes involves people using loudspeakers or
music systems mounted on vehicles.
It seems to me the powers in this bill will be able to use to shut down political
demonstrations, order people to disperse, and arrest them if
they refuse or try to return. And this is a big problem for a rights-respecting
democracy.
Now, to finish off, I want to talk about what these two parts have in common,
and what it is is that there are no meaningful
restrictions on the use of these powers. There's no exceptions.
There's no oversight. There's no approval process or requirement for a
senior officer to be involved. There's no appeal.
There are really no limits.
The bill embodies a view that the police will never misuse or abuse their
powers, that every police officer and employee, because it covers employees
as well, will always do the right thing, that we don't need to limit how
police powers are used.
I believe this is a very dangerous view. Police are human.
They make mistakes. They exhibit bias.
Some of them are unfortunately corrupt.
And for one obvious and exhaustively documented example, police
statistics and reports clearly show they're biased against Māori.
A society that enacts laws that the police are always right is going down a very
dangerous path towards authoritarianism, and that's why I say it's a
radical bill. It's a radical extension of police powers, and it's
radical in the way that it assumes that police can do no wrong.
I believe that we should not pass it in its current form.
And that's not to say the purpose of the bill is inherently wrong.
I believe there is room to better codify how, when, where, and
why police can record audio and video.
I believe there may be room to give police the ability to close areas where
large-scale lawlessness is happening.
But these purposes have to be taken seriously in the context of a
rights-respecting democratic society that values freedom,
which is a version of Aotearoa that I'd like to live in.
They need proper consideration of how we can let police do their
job while still protecting our rights, not this carte blanche
do what you want license.
I recommend you send this bill back for a substantial rewrite.
If you don't, please consider some of the suggestions we made in our written
submission. Thank you for your time. I'm happy to answer any questions.
Thank you, Thomas. You have got still some time, and there is a question
from Dan Rosewarne. So if you- Yeah. Thank you. Thank you, Thomas.
Just a question around recommendation two of your submission, where you
suggest rewording the new Section 45A, and
it's got, "Police constables may make recordings in public without
warrant only when there is a reason to believe that there'll be use of
force or when violent or aggressive behavior is
anticipated or displayed." My question is, isn't that
still quite broad? Because the reason I ask is the way I read it, it would
still allow everyday interactions to be recorded just in
case something becomes useful later, which is one of your concerns, and I'm just
wondering if you had any further thoughts on that at all.
I think that was partly inspired by some of the work we're reading about body
cameras, and I think it's actually meant to be limiting it to that.
That may be slightly overly restrictive, to be honest.
I think it might be more than we'd say we'd want to go.
But it's coming from that view of that-We do want to be able
to set limits and reasons and requirements for
when these things are being recorded, when recording is happening.
And I think that's really the most important point to take out of that.
We also have another question from Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. Accepting, Thomas, that part of what you're
referring to about being able to have
surveillance into closed spaces, parking that for a moment, in
relation to your concerns around surveillance in open spaces,
particularly around digital videoing and the like,
where we live in a world where someone could be standing there and videoing the
whole thing anyway-
Mm-hmm
... why is it such a concern that the police may,
under this act, have the ability to
also video that
in a scenario where that could then be used later as evidence?
Mm-hmm. Yep.
I think the thing is that
there is a power imbalance there. If a normal person is videoing me doing
something, it's an equal power balance.
When the police do things, they are acting with the power of the state,
and it's intimidating. One of the examples I give is that
talking to people who are at
protests, this is actually a few years ago now, and they were saying that the
police at these political protests standing back
using long-lens cameras to zoom in and take
photos of everyone there. And they found that intimidating,
and it actually made them feel that they didn't want to turn up at future political
protests. So it was discouraging their political participation.
Now you can say, "Okay, but journalists might have been doing that too." And the
answer is that the people would not have been nervous about journalists doing
it. It was the fact that the state was doing it that caused the
issue.
And that applies across all these things.
The actual rules we come up with,
I've got opinions on what some of those should be and so on, but
we do have to consider there's power imbalance, and that's why we need
separate rules for police.
Thank you, Thomas, very much for your time today and your submission.
So thank you. We now need to head on to our next submitter-
Thank you
... also by Zoom. Thank you, Thomas.
The New Zealand Law Society, and I think we may have
Juliet Philpott and Nick Chisnell.
Welcome. You have 10 minutes with us today. Thank you.
Yes. Tena koutou katoa. I'm Nick Chisnell KC.
I'm the convener of the Law Society's Criminal Law Committee, and I'm
joined by Juliet Philpott, who's a member of the Human Rights and
Privacy Committee.
I intend to make some preliminary comments before asking Juliet to address you
on Part 1 of the bill. I'll then briefly address Part 2 before
we answer any questions that the committee may have for us.
Thank you.
My starting point is that the Law Society joins the Privacy Commissioner and others
who have expressed deep concerns about the significant proposed
expansion to police intelligence gathering powers in Part 1 of
the bill. For Part 2, we query the
justification for and workability of the proposed new powers
to enforce the temporary closure of publicly accessible areas.
If the bill was to proceed, we'd invite greater safeguards
be put in place. So simply put, the Law Society does not
consider that the bill should pass in its current form.
The policy justifications for the extensions that the bill
proposes to law enforcement powers are questionable and have not been
sufficiently articulated.
The lack of public consultation has produced a set of proposals
that risk overreach and which are incompatible with settled privacy
principles and freedom of expression.
In our submission, if enacted, the bill will create real difficulties
in application for police officers tasked with using its powers.
Inevitably, litigation will ensue because the bill does not clarify
the law.
There is a real likelihood that Māori and Pasifika communities will be
disproportionately affected by what is a virtually unfettered power
to photograph and record for information gathering.
The bill's intelligence gathering powers will have a far greater
impact on the privacy interests of the community at large than any
other kind of information gathering power currently available to
law enforcement agencies, and it stands in stark contrast,
in our view, to the careful approach that was taken to the
enactment of the Search and Surveillance Act through
consultation and routine statutory reviews, which in
our view reflects what ought to happen here.
Similarly, the approach taken in the bill starkly contrasts with the
Criminal Investigations Samples Act, which carefully
prescribes the taking and storage of DNA profiles,
and that Act's fitness for purpose was recently considered by the Law
Commission. It's deeply concerning to us that the bill
contains no similar controls for the storage and retention
of personal information. So with those comments in mind, I'll now hand over to
Juliet to address you on Part 1.
Thank you.
Tena koutou katoa. As you've seen, the Law Society has made a range
of specific points about Part 1 of the bill, and I'm going to focus on two of
those today. The first is to emphasize our
view that there are insufficient safeguards in either the bill or the Privacy Act
to mitigate privacy risk caused by the expanded intelligence
gathering powers that the bill would give to police.
And I suggest this can be seen in two specific mechanisms that are proposed by the
bill. The first is proposed Clause
45C, which gives the police very broad powers to collect
intelligence on private property without a warrant, and
regardless of whether the intelligence being collected has any connection to the
reason that the police are on the property in the first place.
No specific safeguards are provided in the bill itself, and it
is unclear what the justification for these provisions are, given both the Tamifuna
decision and the IPCAOPC report involved images
taken in public.
The clause, as drafted, amounts to a significant imposition on
individual privacy on private property,
and the Law Society believes that the development of such a proposal
requires clear justification, appropriate safeguards, and specific and
adequate public consultation.
The second mechanism that I
believe
suggests that there are insufficient safeguards is the provisions that enable
collection of personal information for intelligence purposes in public.
If passed, the bill enables information collection for any lawful purpose connected
with a function or activity of the police.
The safeguard and information privacy principle one in the Privacy Act,
which says that police may only collect personal information that is necessary for
a lawful purpose, will no longer apply.
And in addition, as you're aware, the bill provides that police can collect
intelligence data not only if it will support a police function at the time of
collection, but also if it may support a police
function or activity in future.
This is expressed as a limitation on the collection of intelligence, but
we suggest that this future-looking, highly permissive limitation will
provide only limited protection, in particular, combined with the
removal of the necessity requirement.
Although the expressed intention is that the Privacy Act will continue to provide
protection, as you know, the concept of the purpose of collection
of information underpins most of the key information privacy principles in the
Privacy Act. Given the permissive nature of both provisions in the bill
that I've referred to, and the fact that these provisions will supersede the
information privacy principles, there is a concern that any protection
given by the Privacy Act itself would not be adequate.
The second point I want to emphasize in the time we have
relates to the clarity of the drafting of the provisions.
The departmental disclosure statement explains that the bill is intended
to address uncertainty created by the Supreme Court in Tamifuna,
but the Law Society is concerned that the provisions themselves are drafted in a
way that may create rather than mitigate
uncertainty.
An example is the provision permitting collection of information for an
intelligence purpose connected with a function or activity of the police.
As you know, the police's functions are listed in Section 9 of the Policing
Act, but neither the word "activity" nor the phrase "intelligence purpose" are
defined anywhere. Clarity around the scope of this provision is
essential in our view, and that's not only to ensure
there's clarity about the impact on individual privacy rights,
but crucially to make sure that frontline police staff understand the
limits of their authority to collect information before collection occurs.
And we recommend at a minimum that these terms are clarified.
Those are the two points I wanted to reiterate in the time available.
I will just pass back to Nick to speak to you briefly about part two.
Thank you.
Thanks, Juliet. The Law Society's main concern is that
whilst part two's framed towards road
policing, has the potential application that goes well beyond that
to protest, which of course is likely to make it
contentious. And one thing I will say
is that what we have is essentially a continuation of a
power that's been there in some shape or form for nearly five decades.
But now's the time to hit pause and to actually
consider the rights implications of this provision, which
is another reason why we say that alongside part
one, there needs to be some proper consultation with it.
And
we, of course, in our written submissions, have suggested some preconditions on the
use of this new power if it is enacted,
which are in paragraph 6.15 and 6.16
of our written submissions. And the reason for that is that this is a power which,
of course, is going to be exercised on the ground by what may be junior
police officers. So it would give certainty to the officers involved
as well as those whose rights are affected.
And the other point, of course, is that what's proposed in terms of use of
infringement offenses, we say, would be wrong in principle,
given that infringements don't recognize the important rights that are
involved and the ability to scrutinize that properly through the court.
Just as a final comment, there has been a recent decision in New
South Wales, a case called Jarrett, which was where the
changes to the law in relation to the Terrorism Police Powers Act were
essentially struck down by the court as being arbitrary and too
widely drafted. Whilst a different kind of provision or
enactment to what we're dealing with, there were greater controls in place for
that legislation. And I'd simply suggest that that does
show the risks associated with this type of legislation, which
can apply to the freedom of expression and the right to protest.
With that in mind, we're here to answer any questions that you may have for us.
We do have a question from Dan Rosewalde.
Yeah, thanks, Chair. Just a question for Juliet.
In relation to an example that you provided in paragraphs
4.4 of the submission. So a driver is stopped at a
routine checkpoint and breath tested.
They pass the test and they haven't committed an offense.
So under the bill as drafted, are you saying that police could take
a person's photograph and store it indefinitely and for
future use in unrelated investigations, even though they've done nothing
wrong? Is that what you're saying?
That is the Law Society's concern, yes.
That because the
taking of the photograph could be interpreted as being
a lawful purpose connected with a function or
activity of the police, then that would be something that would be information that
could be taken using the mechanism under this.
The bill is drafted and then stored and used
or even disclosed under the Privacy Act,
and with
very little limitation on that.
Thank you very much, Juliet and Nick, for a very thorough
submission today. I'm sorry we've got to move on, but thank you very much.
We have that in front of us. Thank you.
Next up, we've got the Community Law Centers, Aotearoa in
person.
Welcome.
Kia ora.
Come on up. Karen Hodginson.
That's me. Huge fan.
Thank you. No Craig today?
I'm not sure. He might be joining us, but he was-
Okay, so Craig Clark may attend on Zoom
May be popping in. He's at a-
But welcome. You've got 10 minutes today. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you. Tena tatou.
Thank you so much for having me here today.
So my name's Karen Hodginson. I'm the law reform
coordinator for Community Law Centers, which means that I hear all the
feedback from Community Law Centers across the country.
And
we do some work in advising people about their engagements with
police,
and
low-level criminal offenses.
So our main concern, I'm just going to stick to part one really of the
act, I think. Our concerns about part two have really been canvassed by others.
But, oh, kia ora, Craig. Nice to see you.
Hi. Sorry I'm a bit late.
That's cool. I'm just going to talk to the submissions a little bit,
and then Craig can say anything extra or answer any questions as well.
So our main concern is that the information collecting powers in this bill
are extremely broad.
Intelligence purpose is not defined.
There's no proportionality requirement.
And it's a circular internal test around what meets the test
and
what meets intelligence purpose or lawful purpose in
Section 45A. There's no requirement to connect it to an
investigation. There's no accountability to anybody for
why those images and recordings are collected.
No need to get permission
from a higher officer or anything like that.
The
collection point is very broad. Secondly, around
retention.
And I think a lot of our concerns stem from the drafting of it being such a
broad,
Section 45 in particular, and those newer sections about collection being
so broad, is that then it colors the rest of what happens to this information.
So in terms of retention, because of the very broad purpose in
the bill,
the retention
requirements are really broad as well.
So we're talking about this might be useful in the future, so
the police could kind of keep this as long as they think necessary, because
it might turn up in the future as important or as connecting somebody to something.
And there's no framework. You will have heard from other submitters that
once this information is collected by the police, there's
nothing else in the bill about how that is used and how it is
stored and how it is retained and how it is deleted.
And ostensibly, the Privacy Act is supposed to apply here, but
again, because of those really broad powers, it will color how
the Privacy Act will apply.
We're also concerned about potential impacts on particular groups, Maori and
young people in particular, and for the perpetuation of bias.
It's really important that there is public confidence in the police and in police
powers, and the broad nature of these powers and the lack of framework around them
does not give this confidence.
I talked about proportionality earlier, but there is a real concern
about the broad powers and the broad collection versus the policing value of
that information and versus how this is impacting
on privacy rights of people in the public.
The Ministry of Justice refers to this, and we understand that there aren't
other
jurisdictions that we would want to be compared to that actually have these kind of
broad powers.
I'm not a technical expert on AI, but I think what's really important is
that we think about what happens after this is
collected. When these sound recordings, these images, are
collected
and are stored, then what?
We know that there is a greater use of data and of AI across the
board, and there's no framework, no discussion in the
regulatory impact statement beyond internal police
policies to be
created that talk about how this data will be mapped with
other data, how it will be analyzed, especially taking
into account those really broad powers of collection.
We highlight that there are concerns about police
IT systems and their ability to sort of manage
images and store them and identify them and
delete them. I understand from the joint report and the compliance
notice, we know that police have done some work to remove the
images that were taken and that were identified as
needing to be deleted under that joint report.
But there's part of that report where there's parts of the
compliance notice that haven't been remedied.
And from what I can tell from publicly available information, that
there's sort of an inability for police to identify and delete some of
these images that were taken unlawfully as a result of this inquiry.
So we're really concerned that that work hasn't been
talked about. We don't know if that work's being done, and it's really
important that
because the rationale for collection is so broad, what are the practical
measures in place to ensure the categorization, storage,
retention, deletion, and use of this information?
The final point I really want to make is about police integrity and trust and
confidence in the police. We make this in our submission.
There have been several incidents in recent years and
that have damaged, I think, public opinion and public
trust and confidence in the police.
And this government has a priority about law and order.
But there doesn't seem to be any strong guardrails here for the
enforcement of that law and order as it pertains to this particular issue.
And we think that law and orderIs about police also knowing
what their powers are, having safeguards around those powers to ensure the
legitimacy, confidence, and transparency of the enforcement of law
and order.
That's really all I have to say. Craig, did you want to emphasize anything or
add anything on that?
I just made four
notes in relation to what's already been said, and I think
the vague nature of the
drafting has already been well canvassed.
But it is quite concerning that given
that currently the majority of the actions of police are
subsequently placed under further scrutiny, either through the
courts
or through the
legal community, but the vague nature of this current bill would
appear to remove all and any scrutiny
because it's not possible to actually define why it
is the information's being collected.
And,
the fact that
the information collection can be justified with reference to a
purpose that may come into being at some undefined point
in the future,
I would suggest is just bad law,
and that this bill
shouldn't go any further.
We're not in a society that countenances the collection of information
where there is no clearly defined and lawful purpose.
And I think the vague nature of the drafting would suggest that it's
going to be difficult for anyone to define what the purpose of the
collection of the information is, let alone frontline police,
who are essentially, at the time,
adopting a subjective assessment
as to some future necessity for the collection of the
information in a public place with no detailed parameters
prescribing this.
Yeah. That's probably all I have to add, except to say
that my background is
in
residential care and also in the police in the UK, and it was
never the case when I was a policeman that
decisions could be made
that had such
potential future implications for an individual without
the oversight of someone, inspector or above.
So to suggest that
a frontline policeman has sufficient
understanding of the implications of the gathering of the information
and also the rationale for it, I think is quite
naïve.
Thank you very much, Craig and Karen.
We're probably a little bit short on time, but if I just take you back to point 12
in your submission around the intelligence purpose,
and it's you've got need not be related to a specific offense
or investigation. So that's around that Section 45-
45A, yeah
... A and D. How can you see that being strengthened,
and is it the definitions, the wording, something that
needs to be done there?
Yeah. I think there's been a variety of recommendations made and submissions
about how it could be strengthened.
We put in our submission that there should be a
definition which is more broadly and which is more in line with the joint report.
But
I think what's happened is there's been this definition, and then the whole, the
bill's just been completely blown open with nothing.
And I think with the machinery of government, there's got to be some way of being
able to define those powers in a better way.
There's been a variety of recommendations on that.
Did you have anything else to add on that, Craig?
I just think there's insufficient detail.
If you're going to say that there is an intelligent purpose, then you need to
define what that purpose is.
Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Thank you very much, Karen and Craig.
Sorry to cut you there, but a very thorough submission, and thank you for
your time today.
Thank you.
Next up is the Privacy Foundation of New Zealand Incorporated,
in person,
Catrion Evans. Welcome.
Welcome. You've got 10 minutes in front of the committee today.
Please leave a little bit of time at the end for some questions. Thank you.
I will do. Kia ora koutou, and thank you very much for the opportunity to
speak today. As you'll have seen from the submission, the Privacy
Foundation, like many submitters, opposes this bill.
Normally, I would sit here and suggest to you that specific
amendments could be made to address the privacy problems
with the legislation. We always like to take a constructive approach wherever we
can.
The problem is, committee, we found that very difficult to do here.
We can't really suggest any amendments that would fix the problem because
the problem itself lies or appears to lie right
back at the policy level, and we would recommend that the bill get
referred back to policy to consider
how to
address various things that the
bill would need to include. And we fully support the police's
ability to do their job and to do their job in a robust way.
The Privacy Foundation's view is that this bill, with the breadth of the
wording, actually could potentially significantly damage
trust in the police, and it could actually get in the way.
How is a frontline officer, for example, to know
what they can and cannot do?
Effectively, as drafted with the very broad purposes,
there are no limits,
there are no safeguards, and there is no effective
accountability apart from internal accountability, which I don't discount,
but external independent oversight is going to be
missingLike my previous
colleagues in the Privacy Foundation and Community Law,
I'd like to stress or focus
rather on the concept of intelligence, because I think that intelligence
gathering, as you'll have seen from many submissions, appears to be the fundamental
problem.
Intelligence purposes connected with a functional activity of police,
that is no particular limitation.
Functions of the police are defined in the Policing Act.
Activities, though, are a much broader concept.
They are not themselves defined, so there's no particular
limitation.
Intelligence gathering effectively becomes a word that can
mean anything that the user wants it to mean.
It's a Humpty Dumpty term.
That word can mean anything that I choose.
At the very least, committee, we would recommend that intelligence
is defined in the bill, and that some specific
safeguards are put in place that
would allow information
to be gathered where there is a genuinely good reason for it to do so.
Problem is that at this stage,
police have stated that it's not possible to define it.
And this-
That was going to be my question to you
Yeah.
And there may well be some real problems at the
policing level.
Sorry,
with policing, there may be some real issues that they are trying to address.
I'm sure there are, and my colleague sitting behind me no doubt will address the
committee on that.
But at the moment, we can't see that.
It's just we need the information for intelligence purposes, or
Tamifuna and the joint inquiry of the Independent Police
Conduct Authority and the Privacy Commissioner gets in the way of us
doing our job. I'd like to understand, and before the
committee could make any amendments or suggest a definition for
intelligence, I think we need to have a much clearer understanding about where
those problems lie.
For example,
is it a problem with police wanting to use body-worn cameras?
There's nothing in the legislation at the moment that would stop the police from
using body-worn cameras, not for general intelligence purposes.
That may not be the problem, but where
is the problem? Where are the police not able to do their
job?
If one was to define intelligence purposes in the bill,
the Privacy Foundation recommends that it should say what are the
specified grounds for which
intelligence can be gathered. For example, for particular
serious offenses, such as national
security, international or domestic organized crime.
What is that range of offenses? Where is the problem?
Define what those problems are. Specify the
purposes for which information can be
collected. Even if that's not directly attached to
an inquiry, there must at least be some kind of connection
through to a legitimate and proportionate purpose.
The bill should specify what the limits of those collections
are, and it should be subject to some form of independent check.
Now, if the purposes were better defined, the Privacy Act would actually have room
to operate.
At the moment, though, with the purposes being so broadly defined
as the Law Society and others have submitted, the Privacy Act
effectively cannot operate because it's a purpose-driven
statute.
If the Policing Act defines the purposes as being yea broad,
the Privacy Act cannot then step in and say, "Well, is
it necessary to collect for those purposes?"
It's always going to be necessary to collect for those purposes, so it has no
real effect, and it's incorrect to say that the Privacy Act will
apply as normal because it won't.
I know that the Privacy Commissioner has recommended that regulations could be
put in place to have the specificity, and often, particularly
in a dynamic environment,
we would support that. That's often the place to put detail
rather than the primary legislation.
But here, the problem with the definition of
intelligence or the lack of definition with intelligence
is so fundamental that the Privacy Foundation
would submit it can't be fixed. It's not appropriate to fix it through regulations.
It should be in the primary legislation itself, and everybody knows
where they stand, and everybody knows what they can do.
I know it's easier to amend regulations over time rather than have to come back to
Parliament and amend primary legislation.
I get the dynamics. But this is so fundamentally important
to trust and confidence in the police and public's ability to
go about their own lives without undue
surveillance that it needs to be in the primary
legislation itself.
It's not sufficient for the police to say that on one hand, we can't define it, but
then say, "Oh, we'll deal with it in internal documentation." You
can either define it or you can't define it. Which is it?
And if you can define it, put it in the primary legislation.
Thank you very much, committee.
Thank you. I'll just check to see if there's any questions.
Thank you for that submission. That was really helpful.
So if we don't define terms like intelligence purpose or
police activities-
Yes
... what risks does that create for the relationship between police,
the public, and the law?
It creates a great deal of uncertainty, both for police operations, in our
submission, but also for the public knowing what it is
that is allowed, isn't allowed. What can you
challenge? If you're going into court, when can you say this evidence
was properly obtained or improperly obtained?
Specifying or creating a better framework within the
legislation would give everybody that certainty.And
it would enable the public to see that actually, the police are never going to come
out and sort of do broad surveillance of the public.
Instead, they're going to be focusing on particular things, and everybody can see
that those things are proportionate and justified, and the police activity would
be appropriate in those circumstances.
Or can be clearly challenged if somebody has a view that it's not.
Leaving it really open-ended as it is, is just unhelpful for
everybody. I'm not saying the police are going to go out and commit
mass surveillance of the New Zealand population.
I'm sure they don't have either resources or the time to do that.
But the fact is that there is low trust in certain
areas in the police and we don't need to make that any worse in
our society.
Thank you.
No further questions, but thank you for a very-
Thank you very much
... thorough submission. You've opened the floor for our next submitters that are
the New Zealand Police Association.
So I welcome you forward, Steve Watson, is it?
Thank you.
President of the New Zealand Police Association.
Kia ora.
And thanks for-
And thanks for having me today. Do appreciate it.
Obviously there's two parts to the proposed legislation which we've
submitted on, and hopefully you've had an opportunity to read through those
submissions.
Given that we've submitted those, I won't talk too much around the
facts and figures and things like that, as I'm sure there'll be plenty of questions
that you'll want to ask. We do want to emphasize, though, that we
are in support of this bill in its entirety.
It creates a situation where police
will actually have a firmer idea of what
and where they can do things as we progress into the
future. If you think about the Tamifuna case, what that did
was created a substantial amount of uncertainty as to
what the police could and could not do when it came to
photographing individuals or images.
And when you think about the very nature of policing and what it is that they
do, information gathering and intelligence is a vital and critical
part of the whole policing process.
So this bill seeks to strike a balance
between what police can and cannot do,
therefore giving them better tools and equipment in which to do what
they do best. Get out there and solve your burglaries.
Get out there and deal to those that have stolen your car.
This just provides the right tools for officers to be able to do
that and provides that clarity around what they can and can't do.
Just want to reemphasize that again.
I do briefly want to also touch on the public places
part of this proposed bill. And again, this provides
a very good platform in which the police, our members,
have a clear understanding of, again, what they can and can't do in regards to
shutting down public places. What we have to bear in mind is that
this part of the legislation seeks to strike
a perfect balance between public safety and police's
ability in order to enforce that.
Having the ability to analyze and look at
a situation and determine that there is likely to be
disorder in that area and therefore shut down that
piece of land or street or road or whatever,
just again, adds to that public safety and trust out there
that people can have in our members.
Look, I will leave it there at this stage.
It's a very brief overview, but I appreciate there's probably a few questions, so
I'll open it up to the committee for questions.
If I just start, you started with what we can and
can't do. And I think if you, and you've sat in the room and heard
already some of the submissions today, it seems that
people don't know quite where the line is, if I put it that way.
So what was your response back there?
So prior to the Tamifuna case, clarity
around what police officers could and could
not film and photograph was very, very clear.
However, since that case, there was confusion even amongst our members
as to what they can and cannot photograph, for what
reason and why. So this piece of proposed
legislation just clarifies that actually you can go
out there, you can gather
photographs and video for intelligence or investigation purposes,
and just really clears up the whole issue that was created out of that
Tamifuna case.
We've heard from submitters around the
amount of information you might collect and how that could be
stored and when would it be deleted.
Can you give us kind of some understanding around what would be different from
forward to under this piece of legislation?
What we've got to remember and if I just take your mind back to the IPCA
and the Privacy Commissioner's inquiry
into police photographing and intelligence gathering
procedures. They made a number of recommendations to police,
which were subsequently implemented, and have continued in
policy for police officers to this day.
So it should provide
a level of
assurance that police do have processes in place
in regards to this type of intelligence gathering
that will see them utilize it in an appropriate way.
Got a question from MP Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. And firstly, thank you to you and to your members for the
work they do across the country. On page five
of your submission, you refer to just a number of different
examples of boy racer events. Manawatu, April
2026; Levin, May 2025; Wellington, Hutt Valley,
December 2025; Hamilton, August 2024; Palmerston
North, April 2026; Porirua, September 2025; Rotorua, July
2025. Can you just give us a little bit more
insight into how you practically see the proposed
changes around giving you more tools in these situations
will do to either reduce the frequency of these events or enable
your members to respond more effectively when
they're occurring?
Yeah, absolutely. And it comes back to, and sorry to
overuse the word intelligence, but when we hear of events and
situations happening, it's often
sometimes days, can be weeks, if not hours
before this sort of event takes place.
Invariably, word gets out, we hear about it,
but
we don't necessarily have the powers at the moment in
order to respond to that intelligence, shut down areas
before these
sorts of groups can congregate. So this proposed
legislation, coupled with the intelligence that police have, just
gives us a clearer opportunity in order
to analyze that and deal with these types of situations
quickly and effectively by shutting down public places
before such events can occur.
I've got a question from Dean Roswell.
Thank you.
So I accept that police may need to take photos, and
I understand that there's a need for operational clarity
amongst or across frontline staff.
But do you have concerns that without clearer rules in the
legislation itself, frontline officers are effectively being asked
to make judgment calls that Parliament could instead
resolve within this legislation?
Mm.
And could this uncertainty inadvertently put
officers at risk legally later on down the track?
I appreciate that the scope of the legislation is quite
wide, and there is an opportunity to perhaps look at some of
those items that were identified there previously in regards to
definitions that may just sort of provide some clarity or further
clarity, should I say, around what can and can't be done.
Got a further question from Carl Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Often in this committee and in other committees
I sit on within Parliament, we hear from the likes of
unions, we hear from associations and practitioners in
health and education suggesting that
government and Parliament should keep its hands off
them determining how to implement policy on a day-to-day basis.
And through the listening to the submissions on this piece of
legislation, I've sort of felt a little bit like everyone's trying to say,
"Actually, government should get their hands in and write the operational
manual for you in terms of how to implement this piece of
legislation." Do you think it's
reasonable for government to set a framework,
a piece of legislation like this, and then allow police
to, through your implementation or through police's implementation,
your members, actually put in those details about how long a photo would be kept
for, at what point you determine it's no longer relevant and should be
deleted, et cetera,
as we would in other professions?
Absolutely. And I think we've got to have trust in the police
that they've gone through a rigorous process
around, as I say, the IPCA investigation, the Privacy
Commission investigation, and they've learnt from that.
If anything, the police aren't here to be overbearing,
but simply do a job,
simply do what the public expect of them, to solve their
burglaries, to keep them safe.
And they do that very, very well.
So what we've got to do is have a little bit of trust in police that they will put
parameters in place, whatever the legislation is, and
not seek to extend or overuse that
for some nefarious purpose.
Thank you.
Questions? Okay, thank you very much.
We've probably gone a little bit over, but it was good to get some of those answers
from you today. Very clear submission.
Thank you.
Appreciate your time. Next, we've got the Wellington Community Justice
Project, the Howard League Submissions team.
A large team of... Got three people coming forward.
Well, just if you could introduce yourself to the committee, we
have 10 minutes for you today.
Maybe we'll go from this end of the table if-
Yep. Hi, my name is Jane.
Jane, welcome.
I'm a law student.
Yep.
I'm May.
May.
I'm Cordelia. I'm as well a law student.
Welcome.
Pleasure.
Okay. If the-- Please go through, pick the points,
and maybe just leave some time,
and I'll indicate to you if we're getting too close to the 10 minutes. Okay.
Thank you.
So we did have a little introduction beforehand. I'll just kind of continue.
So May,
Cordelia, and Jane, we are law students from Te Herenga Waka,
submitting as volunteers of the Wellington Community Justice Project's Howard
League Submissions team, which advocates for penal reform and criminal
justice. While we are supported by the Howard League, the opinions expressed in the
submission are our own. Our oral submission addresses discriminatory
effects of this bill against Maori, issues of indigenous data
sovereignty, and a general concern for privacy under the bill.
We will begin with our first speaker, Cordelia.
Tena koutou. I will briefly address the discriminatory impact
of this bill on Maori.
Our concern is that expanding police powers without strong safeguard will
deepen existing inequality. Maori are already
over-represented in Maori contact and incarceration.
And broad powers to collect information in public creates a real
risk that is the burden that will grow.
History shows that expanded surveillance and police
power have often had disappropriation impacts
on Maori community. This can be seen in events such as the
2007 police raid, Urewera, as well as the more recent
concerns around unlawful police photographing, particularly involving
Maori and Rangatiras.
The problem is not just the existing of the power, but the discretion it gives the
police. Where the law is vague, those powers are more likely
to be applied unevenly, and history shows that the Maori are often the
ones who bear the impact. Increased surveillance does not operate in a
vacuum. It feeds into the wider criminal justice system and can
contribute to more police contact and more charges and ultimately
more imprisonmentsBecause police officers
excuse the border discretion, there's also a risk that consequences of
unconditional racist bias may be influenced.
Who is viewed as suspicious or subjected to a greater
sincerity. This
means that the bill may reinforce patterns over policing rather than
addressing them. For these reasons, we submit that the bills require
stronger and safeguard and oversight to prevent its appropriation harm
to the Māori community. Thank you. I'll pass on to May.
Thank you.
Tena koutou katoa. An important concern is that this bill
reflects a wider international trend of expanding surveillance and
intelligence-gathering powers that often disproportionately affect
minority communities. While these powers are usually justified,
internationally, we've seen that they tend to impact communities that are already
heavily monitored. In Aotearoa, that concern is especially
relevant for Māori, who are already significantly over-represented in
police interactions and incarceration statistics.
Expanding police powers to collect and retain information more broadly
risks reinforcing those existing disparities.
This also raises the issue of Māori data sovereignty.
Information about Māori communities is not neutral.
It shapes policing decisions, risks assessments,
and future state intervention.
Under principles linked to Te Tiriti and tino
rangatiratanga, there is an argument that Māori should have greater
involvement and oversight regarding how data about the communities is collected,
stored, and used. Internationally, concerns have also been raised
about predictive policing systems reproducing historical bias
by relying on data from communities already subject to heavier policing.
This can create a cycle where increased surveillance leads to more police
contact, generating further data used to justify continued
surveillance. So while the bill is presented as
improving policing efficiency, there is a concern that
without stronger safeguards and meaningful Māori oversight, these expanded
powers may deepen existing inequities and further undermine
some trust between the Māori minority
communities and state. Ngā mihi. I will pass on to Jane.
Thank you.
Tena koutou. I would like to expand on the Section 21
NZBORA concerns raised in the written submission.
I think it is important to recognize why protections against unreasonable
search and surveillance exist in the first place.
They are not simply technical legal limits on policing.
They exist to preserve the balance between state power and
individual freedom in a democratic society.
In Tamifuna, the Supreme Court was concerned about
broad intelligence gathering powers untethered from a
specific investigation. This bill moves further toward that
model by allowing information to be collected for broad, lawful
purposes, based largely on what an officer considers
useful.
The concern here is not simply that these powers are broad, but how they
may gradually change everyday interactions between individuals and
the state.
In practice, ordinary people who are not suspected of wrongdoing may still
be recorded and have information retained by police.
Over time, when surveillance becomes routine rather than exceptional,
there is a risk that people begin to expect monitoring as
a normal part of public life. That matters
because public freedom in a democratic society depends not only on
rights existing formally, but on people feeling able to participate
openly in public life without unnecessary state
intrusion. Broad discretionary powers can also
undermine trust in policing if their use
appears inconsistent or uneven.
Ultimately, the concern is about ensuring that expanded police powers
remain proportionate, clearly limited, and consistent with
the values Section 21 NZBORA exists to protect.
That is the end of our submission. We now invite questions from the committee.
Thank you. We do have a question from Dan Rosewell.
Thank you, Chair. Hey, that was a fantastic submission. Really appreciate that.
In your submission here, you highlight that
technology can amplify existing biases even when there's
no intent to do so, and I just want to hear from you, if
you could expand on how AI-driven tools might
reinforce or magnify existing bias in
police systems when they're fed large volumes of data and
images, particularly for Māori communities.
I'm not
fully educated on this topic. However, AI, as
you said, is used by feeding it data,
and a lot of the data is already
flawed and has racial patterns. And that's
why we think that when you feed that data and more data,
AI will use past data and those patterns
to formulate the results that it will, and that may
result to
more flawed data.
We don't have any further questions for you, but very clear submission,
well presented. It was really good how you went through that.
So, thank you very much for your time today.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Now, in front of me, I may be wrong. I've got Justice for All.
Is that-
They are coming in.
They are coming on online. So we'll wait for Justice for All.
Lois, Janice, and Shane. So we'll just be a moment.
So far, we're running on time as well, Tempus.
Yeah.
Well done.
Hello, Janice. I can hear you, but I can't see you. So maybe...
There we go. We can see you
Thanks for joining us. Welcome. I'm Jamie Arbuckle, Deputy Chair of the
Justice Committee. You're in front of us today for 10
minutes, so the floor is yours.
Good afternoon. I'm Lois McGuire.
I'm the-
Lois?
Yeah. I'm the Secretary for Justice for All,
and I'd like to start our oral submission by putting the bill into context.
The police have been caught breaching the privacy law and bill of rights.
They've been illegally photographing the public who are doing nothing
wrong. Thousands of photos have been sent through to their database.
A joint inquiry by the Independent Police Conduct Authority and Privacy
Commission found people were photographed for simply looking out of place
or looking suspicious.
The practice was widespread. The issue was systemic.
Officers overstated the benefits of this type of intelligence.
Over half of the photographs taken were of Maori people.
This Policing Amendment Bill is a quick fix.
It attempts to legalize what police have been doing
illegally.
It lacks insight. It raises more questions than it provides
answers.
It doesn't tell us why police need such a large database, or
how their database
creates safer communities, which, after all, is the purpose of policing that we are
told about.
Our civil liberties and rights to privacy are in question.
How does this support the integrity of policing?
In this Policing Amendment Bill, police are given sweeping powers to
continue photographing and videoing the public as long as they do
it lawfully,
as long as they do it in a way that fits their functions and activities,
as long as it has an intelligence purpose or supports their safety.
The bill does not provide any detail about the activities and functions at which
the police are permitted to record public activity.
This is a critical gap. It is extremely vague.
It means we will not know when, where, why, and how the
police will photograph and video the public.
Large-scale recording of public activity creates a risk of
misuse of data leaks and of a use that wasn't the
original purpose.
Surveillance of the ordinary people provides opportunity to monitor citizens who
are not suspected of crimes.
This creates a chilling effect where people will avoid protests,
public gatherings, or political activity because they feel they're being watched.
This could impact our freedom to protest, our very democracy.
We believe that police collection of data must link only to genuine
threats or investigations.
I repeat,
police collection of data must link
only to genuine threats or investigations.
To eliminate any confusion, this premise should be codified in
law.
Furthermore, the surveillance powers employed to address serious crime
can gradually be normalized to be used in less serious
situations.
To prevent this creep
in the police powers of surveillance, again,
laws need to be written to protect citizens and to maintain
a proportionate response.
In our view, police will support this bill, arguing that making it legal for
them to photograph
people anywhere at any time will give them a tool for more effective
policing to keep the police safe,
to keep the public safe.
We disagree.
There are already cameras everywhere recording what we do.
We don't need another level of surveillance.
If this bill goes through as it is written, we suggest we are heading towards a
totalitarian state where we are under constant
surveillance and where might is right.
This is not democracy.
I'll now hand over to Shane.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
I will talk about clarity.
To make it lawful for the police to continue photographing and videoing the
public, does this mean we need to change our bill of rights and privacy laws?
This question needs to be debated and not happen by stealth after passing
vague laws.
Both the public and the police need to know when the police are acting lawfully,
and accountability must be seen to happen when they are not.
We need clarity around privacy protections and safeguards
against misuse.
When our privacy protections are weakened by the police, a broad collection
of images, audio, and identifying information can be formed
without warrants or strong oversight.
Once that data is collected, it is hard to know how long it will be stored for
and who can access it.
People will feel vulnerable. There will be uncertainty and further
erosions of trust.
We need transparent systems for data storage, oversight, and
deletion.
We need strong privacy protections to prevent abuse of
state power.
The public need to know their rights and that the police will be
accountable.
Technology is putting us in a new era with new problems that must
be wisely addressed by the lawmakers.
This is important.
With young people increasingly disillusioned about what lies ahead
and the reported rise of antisocial behavior,
ambiguous laws that can be misused and lack accountability won't
help us regain their respect or social order.We
need a bigger nationwide conversation about surveillance by authority.
And thank you. I'll pass you over to Janice.
Hello. I want to talk about trust and police.
Affecting policing is not about
surveillance, photographing, and videoing the public.
It is about trust and respect. Trust and respect
needs to be rebuilt in two ways.
Public trust in the police has been seriously damaged by
photographing our youth, particularly our Maori children,
who are over-represented in their database.
We have concerns about police accountability.
Giving police expanding powers without
equally strong independent oversights increase
the risk of misuse.
There needs to be help to safeguard
the rights of citizens
around privacy.
It can be difficult for ordinary people to challenge police
decisions in real time.
History in many countries shows emergency or expanding
policing powers are often difficult to roll back once
introduced.
If this Police Amendment Bill is not changed to reduce
the police ability to photograph
and record the public, particularly to record our youth, there will be a
pushback.
Pushback from the next generation.
People will ask, why can't they
photograph, video, and record
the police? What is to stop a civilian database on the
police from being created?
If this use of surveillance technology by police is not
managed with wisdom and in a spirit of reducing
conflict,
two emerging and opposing parties will form, the
police versus the public.
Faith in the police doing a good job will be lost.
Already there is a pushback. Police are being videoed, and these
clips posted on social media. These postings
often show police acting in intimidating, threatening ways.
This will add to anti-police culture.
In our view, we need better police training to prevent this
overbearing behavior and intrusion into our
lives. We need wise laws to make us
forward
in a united way.
We ask you to ditch this Policing Amendment Bill.
Thank you for allowing us this time to do this oral
submission.
Thank you very much. I'll just see if there's any questions.
Not being any, I thank you, Lois, Janice, and Shane, for
your submission. It was very, very clear. Thank you for your time today.
Thank you.
Okay. I'll call now People Against Prisons Aotearoa.
I believe they are on Zoom, and Tom Pearce will be joining us.
Tom, I see you there. Welcome. We're with you for 10
minutes today, so please maybe leave some time at the end of the
submission for some questions.
Okay. Kia ora.
Tena koutou katoa. My name's Tom.
I'm speaking on behalf of PAPA today, People Against Prisons Aotearoa.
We are a prison abolitionist organization working for a fairer, safer, and more
just Aotearoa,
and we are submitting very, very strongly against this bill.
I do plan to just focus on part one of the bill.
However, we are deeply concerned by part two as well.
As an organization that does often engage in protests,
we think that part two raises the potential for misuse by police to shut down
legitimate protest, and
in doing so, it puts at risk a really important democratic right.
So, I didn't listen to the Law Society's submission, but I know
that they've talked about this, so I think it's safe to say that we
echo the Law Society's concerns about part two of this bill
around the right to protest and how it might be misused by police.
However, if
part two of this bill has the potential for misuse, then part one is deliberately
designed for misuse.
This bill gives carte blanche to police to photograph and collect
information from whoever they want, which just rides
roughshod over our rights to privacy,
our rights to freedom from unreasonable search and seizure,
and it gives the green light to just grossly discriminatory police practice.
So,
I don't need to go through the history of this bill.
I assume other submitters have covered it.
I'm sure the committee knows well
what this bill has come out of.
The Privacy Commissioner and the IPCA rightly stepping in
to rein in police practice to protect people's rights.
And now,
with this bill, the government has seen fit to just to
override the IPCA and the Privacy Commissioner in, frankly, what's a
very, very blunt way. This bill hasn't attempted to actually
weigh or balance police operational practices with privacy.
It simply strips away our rights to privacy in the
face of police operations almost completely.
So, I think it's really important
context to our opposition to this bill
for me to explain some of the existing biases in policing
and to talk about that, because I think doing so highlights why this bill is quite
such,
in my opinion, why it's such a dire moral failure, and why this
bill will really grossly amplify
the bias that already exists within policingSo,
this is certainly not the first time I've appeared before this committee.
In the past, when I've talked to this committee about police bias,
and
particularly about the disproportionate attention that Māori and Māori
communities receive from police,
I've had members of the committee,
both Labor and National Party members of the committee, push back by
saying that,
I guess to paraphrase bluntly, that Māori commit more crime and that there's more
crime in Māori communities, so naturally there will be
disproportionate police attention on Māori.
Essentially, the arguments that I've heard in the past from the committee is that
over-policing of Māori is justified,
and that it's not actually disproportionate to offending rates among
Māori. But
I just want to make sure the committee understands that this is not the case,
that Māori are over-policed as a result
of police bias. That Māori are six times as likely
as Pākehā to come into contact with police for no
reason. They're four times as likely to be subject to
warrantless search as Pākehā.
Basically, there are these stop and search behaviors of police
that are carried out when the individual has done nothing wrong, that are grossly
out of whack.
And the
only conclusion I think you can draw from that is that police are more
likely to stop someone if they are Māori.
It's an appearance-based bias among police.
And this is also well-documented by police's own research.
The police have acknowledged that they have this kind of bias within
the organization.
They've committed to working on it, but I'm yet to see what they've actually done
to address it.
But when we have a bill like this coming through,
which gives police discretion over their intelligence
gathering, that kind of takes, I guess the privacy and other
safeguards for other rights off,
that will lead to grossly
discriminatory police practice as a result of this existing bias.
And this isn't scaremongering either because we know from
the fact that police were already doing this, they were already photographing
people for years. I think 2017 was roughly when it started,
and 2020 to 2022 is when the Privacy Commissioner actually stepped
in. And the result of that practice was that more than 50% of the
photos gathered were Māori.
These weren't necessarily people that had actually committed any offenses.
These were just innocent people, many of them, who were stopped and photographed by
Māori. Many of them were rangatahi Māori.
And so we know what effect
this bill will have.
And it is just so unacceptable, A, that the bill is being progressed in the first
place, but B, that there are no safeguards in the bill at all.
The bill talks about any,
I'm trying to remember the exact wording.
It's something like any lawful purpose connected with the function of police,
which is just absurdly broad. Any kind of intelligence gathering by
police could be justified on those grounds.
And I think the previous submitter talked about it.
It's police state kind of stuff. And even worse,
it's police state stuff that's aimed directly at one specific
community as a result of these biases that I've just talked about.
It's not an exaggeration to say that this bill will
enable a surveillance web targeted at Māori.
It's a gross violation of human rights, and I think the members should be ashamed
for pushing this bill forward.
I
don't want to take up too much time but-
Well, we've still got a couple more minutes with you, Tom, and I do have a question
from Dan Rosewarne, so I will give you that.
There's one thing that I'd like to talk about first, if that's all right.
Yes.
Our written submission covers a lot of other things, but
I think one of the biggest oversights in the bill,
if you are planning to progress with it, despite all the opposition, I'm
sure that the opposition you will have heard today, one of the worst oversights I
think, is that there are no protections for children at all.
This is such a glaring omission.
It's so hard for me to believe that police operations will be
seriously hindered because they can't photograph children whenever they see them in
public. Surely at the very least, police should have to
believe that the people they're gathering intelligence on are adults rather than
children.
Okay, so if you do nothing else, then that's one change that you could make to
the bill. Otherwise, definitely tighten it up, make sure there are actual
safeguards and an actual threshold for police to gather this intelligence, so that
they can't just photograph whoever they want.
But yeah, sorry, I'll hand it over to questions.
I'll pass it to Dan Rosewarne.
Thanks, Chair. In paragraph 24 of your submission, you state there
is currently no legal framework or oversight governing
police use of AI, and that this bill does nothing to address that
gap.
And I'm interested from a public accountability perspective, who should be
responsible for oversight if AI-driven decisions lead
to biased outcomes? And where do you see that
responsibility sitting if the bill remains silent on it?
I think the responsibility sits with the government agency that's using
AI.
As it would if a human were making those decisions, the government
agency that the human works for
is the agency that would be responsible.
So if that agency is deploying AI in the place of humans to make these sorts
of decisions,
then that agency is the one who needs to be responsible for it.
So if the AI is going to make these biased outcomes,
which, again, it's not tinfoil hat stuff to suggest this.
It's something that's quite well-researched.
Then the police, if they're the ones using that AI, they're the ones who need to be
responsible for those outcomes, and they're the one who should have safeguards in
place around the use of those technologies and
acknowledging and having checks maybe on the outcomes of those
technologies.
So you'd be happy for the agency to mark its own homework or have an
independent body
to oversee it or?
Well, I think
if police are responsible for it, then there are
then other independent agencies who are checks
on police behavior, right? So that should
come under the exact same,
I guess, oversight settings that we have at the moment.
I don't want to come here and advocate for the IPCA because I don't believe that
they're a very or a very particularly effective check on
police as they exist. But yes, as I said, if the
police are using AI, then it should be treated the same way as if a police officer
were doing those things. So any existing checks should remain
for AI as well.
Well, thank you very much, Tom, for your submission today.
That's the time, but that is noted. Thank you very much.
Calling Miro Thomas Irisen. Hopefully I
got that correct.
Welcome.
Thank you.
We've got five minutes with you today.
Your submission has been read, but please take us through your key points and leave
some time for some questions.
Yeah. Hello, good afternoon. I'm Miro Thomas Irisen.
I'm a year 13 student at Wellington High School.
I'm here today to tell you my opinion about the Policing Amendment Bill.
So I think that I'm mainly going to talk about the first part of the bill.
I believe that it is necessary to outline for the police
what the restrictions are on their behaviors.
However, in its current form, I am concerned with some aspects.
So I take issue with the use in the preliminary sections of 45B and
45C of the term by any means necessary.
As outlined by 45C, Section 2, this bill would empower
law enforcement only to use non-surveillance devices.
I think there is a risk that the police officer may decide to use their personal
mobile device for data collection.
Just seven days ago, an instance of such misconduct took place in London in the
UK, where a Met police officer retained multiple photos of
confidential evidence and shared it on a WhatsApp group with his mates.
So I'm worried about such misconduct in New Zealand were this bill to be passed.
Additionally, when you allow officers to use their phones, you give
them an intimidatory power with arbitrary
guidelines for use, in my opinion.
Section 45DA provides through use of the term may,
for police to obtain evidence that may aid future crimes or investigations.
And I do not believe it is necessary for police officers to have the
power to collect evidence or data that may aid
predictive policing models, for example.
Secondly,
I'm concerned with the data sovereignty
of the data that may be collected under the new powers afforded to police by this
bill. So
currently, my understanding is that officers in the New Zealand police are issued
one Apple iPhone each, while patrol teams are additionally issued one Apple
iPad per car.
The prime contractor from which these surveillance devices are procured is Apple,
which as I'm sure you know, is an American registered and headquartered company.
And because they're American, they're subject to the US Cloud and Patriot Act,
which requires the company to provide and allow for the creation of backdoors
in their hardware and software should the United States request it.
And so the United States would have the ability to
access, store or alter that data held within that device
covertly should they choose to do so.
So I'm concerned that were this bill to be passed, there would be
significant risk for foreign actors to unknowingly become party to
evidence or information that is in the possession of the New Zealand police via
iCloud or the Apple ecosystem.
So I think that under these circumstances, especially because
there might be no knowledge by the surveyee or the person having
their image recorded of this arrangement,
it's not acceptable
for the police officers to be able to record data in such
a casual way, for example, with their phone.
I think they should have to use dedicated surveillance devices, because there's
a risk to the data sovereignty in that case.
So I recommend that
the bill should not allow law enforcement to collect data by any means, as
currently outlined in Sections 45B and 45C, and it should be
restricted to collection devices that are sovereign and not subject to
extraterritorial law enforcement, while explicitly prohibiting
use of personal devices, because I think it leaves the door
open to potential misconduct by police officers that will likely
not receive new training on what
the outlines for their new powers are.
Yeah. So that pretty much concludes my submission.
You raised this interesting point around the devices and you said
dedicated surveillance devices.
Did you just want to expand a little bit more on that?
What you think that may mean?
Yeah. So my understanding was that, I'm looking at it, in
45C, Section 2,
it said that this bill particularly provides for police
not to use dedicated surveillance devices as
outlined by, I believe,
some piece of legislation that defines the powers of police regarding
surveillance. So my understanding is that that may
constitute the use of personal mobile devices or other such
data or surveillance devices. However,
I believe the definition given in the bill that was referenced in 45C, Section
2 was particularly devices that have been explicitly procured
to aid surveillance, whereas this one in
my understanding would broaden the police's powers to use more
general devices such as their personal phones or their work phones or
iPads.
Thank you. Thank you. I don't seem to have any further questions, but thank you
very much for your submission today. Thank you. Thank you. Right.
I think our next one may be on Zoom.
The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Society.
We'll wait for them to come through.
John, welcome.
We're with you for 10 minutes today, so if you want to
take us through the key points of your submission and leave some time
for some questions, please. Thank you.
Good, thank you. Called John Wegg, from Talkman Wai.
I'm the chair of the College of Psychiatrists Faculty of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, and unsurprisingly, I'm a child and adolescent
psychiatrist.
In my work, I see a lot of very capable
young people.
I particularly work with Māori tamariki and rangatahi,
and those young people, as I'm sure the committee
knows, often don't see much success in their whānau,
and it feels to them as if there's a big wall for them to
climb over to get to a successful future for themselves.
And we think that this bill is going to make things harder for our young people,
not just Māori people, but disproportionately them.
The wall's going to be higher.
We think it deepens equity gaps for tangata whai ora generally,
people with mental health issues generally, especially Māori.
So our key message is, we think that these powers fall
the hardest on the most vulnerable.
The powers of the act disproportionately reach people whose
non-compliance is a symptom for reasons such as
comprehension, age, anxiety, distrust of
the police.
Excuse me.
There's surveillance with no safeguards.
The bill imposes no data retention limit, no independent
oversight, no protection for tamariki, and no protection for
tangata, tūkuho, such as ta moko and moko
kauae.
It confounds algorithmic bias.
A database disproportionately populated with images of
Māori fed into known biased facial recognition
systems automates inequity.
The Understanding Policing Delivery panel shows the disparity is already
entrenched.
And of course, the Te Tiriti partnership was bypassed.
The bill's own disclosure statement concedes Māori were not meaningfully
consulted, and Te Puni Kōkiri raised concerns that were
noted and set aside for speed. We believe that
urgency is not a legitimate basis for bypassing
Articles 2 and 3 of Te Tiriti.
But to flesh things out a bit more,
in terms of the disparity baseline, as at least one previous
panelist has been saying,
Māori are more than six times likely than Pākehā to be stopped by
police without cause. Māori are four times more likely to be
subject to warrantless search.
And of the tens of thousands of images unlawfully collected by police
prior to the IPCA and Privacy Commissioner inquiries,
more than half were of Māori,
whereas, of course, they make up only about 17% of the
Aotearoa population.
In terms of my specific child adolescent psychiatry focus,
we note that there are zero protections for tamariki in
this bill.
New Zealand police were previously advised against illegally stopping
and photographing Māori children in the street.
That process likely breached the UN Convention on the Rights of the
Child.
Rangatahi are likely to be in environments where these powers are
used.
Tamariki with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder,
ADHD, autism, intellectual disability, or acquired
brain injury are routinely misread by all of us, and we
can only anticipate that frontline officers are bound to do that too.
Their communication and regulation differences look like
defiance and escalate the encounter.
All rangatahi are prone to responding to anxiety and
perceived threat with one of a fight, flight, or freeze
response. None of these are going to be helpful to them in these
situations.
A young person photographed during a mental health crisis or a
mokopuna captured simply for being present in a public space
could find their estate is shaping their future interventions within the justice
system, employment, housing or health services for the rest of
their life.
Without statutory tamariki populations-- protections, sorry,
the bill operationalizes long-tail harm, whose
clinical and social cost is borne by the next
generations.
We're concerned about clinical vulnerability and the bill criminalizing
symptoms.
People experiencing acute mental distress, psychosis,
intoxication, or cognitive or sensory disability may
be present in public space precisely because of their health status,
including homelessness driven by inadequate mental health and addiction
housing.
They may be unable to comply with police directions in the moment.
Creating infringement offenses against people who cannot comply will
criminalize vulnerability and may escalate harm.
Non-compliance may be a symptom rather than a choice.
Unsolicited photography and continuous recording in public space
carries specific clinical harm for people experiencing paranoia,
psychosis, or trauma-related
hypervigilance.The bill authorizes
photography in anticipation of a possible future
policing purpose. That is a very low
threshold for a high impact intervention.
We think that this bill must be read alongside the proposed move
on orders. Together, they create an interlocking
framework and risk criminalizing presence in
public space.
The RANZCP asks for a whole of government health
impact assessment of their combined effects.
So
our recommendations
from the submission.
One, include explicit clinical safeguards for people
experiencing mental distress, psychosis, intoxication, or
disability,
recognizing that non-compliance may be a symptom rather than a choice.
Two, require mandatory data retention limits,
independent oversight, and enforceable accountability
mechanisms for all recording and photography powers,
including explicit data sovereignty protections that
prevent collected information from being used to adversely
affect a person's future interactions with the justice system,
employment, housing, or health services.
Three, insert specific protections for tamariki and
rangatahi consistent with our obligations under the UN
Convention on the Right of the Child.
Four, commission a full Te Tiriti impact assessment
undertaken in genuine partnership with Maori before the bill
proceeds, including specific consideration of the
collections of images of ta moko and moko kauae.
Ta moko and moko kauae are taonga tūkoiho.
The bill authorizes their collection with no tikanga based
safeguard.
Five, require police to delete the many thousands of images
unlawfully collected prior to this bill as condition of being
granted expanded collection authority.
Six, commission a whole of government health impact assessment on the combined
effects of this bill and the proposed move on orders on tangata whenua,
disabled people, and unhoused populations.
Seven, consider the role of more restrictive alcohol licensing
to ensure safe public spaces rather than risk criminalizing
vulnerable individuals.
And eight, place obligations on local health and
disability service funders to provide suitable placements for
people with unmet health and disability needs identified by
police through this bill.
So thank you for the opportunity to present to the committee on
behalf of the college.
Thank you very much, John, for your submission from the
RANZCP. I'll just see if there's any questions from Tim online
or Dan. There's not. Could you just give me
what the definition or the age of a child because
that's often debatable whether it's 16 or are we talking into
teenage years or
when you're saying restricting photos of tamariki, I'm just interested in what
age you think that would relate to.
I would prefer to have the restriction to
anyone under 18.
It's kind of arbitrary where one makes that decision.
Of course, the neurodevelopment-
Sorry to put you on the spot. Just that we will have the Children's
Commissioner in later, and I was just interested.
So,
18 is what you would be thinking in the...
Okay. Okay, John.
Slightly arbitrary, but yes. Mm.
Thank you very much for your submission today, and thank you for your
time.
Thank you very much.
Going to go on to Pillar New Zealand, and they're in
person. Welcome from the back.
Hello.
If you'd like to introduce yourselves and
your organization. And we've got 10 minutes with you today.
So welcome.
Amazing. Thank you so much for having us. My name's Nathan.
I'm the Executive Director of Pillar.
We're a civil liberties organization based here in New Zealand, and we focus on
protecting individual life, liberty, and rights.
This is my colleague, Aryan, Head of Operations.
And thank you for hosting us here today for this conversation.
We have concerns about the bill in its current form, especially around
things like privacy, assembly, association, and other related civil
liberties. We believe the police play a pivotal role in a thriving civil society.
We absolutely think that they should be equipped to do their job properly, and I
think it starts with clear definitions around the legislation we empower them with.
We would love to see clear directives for our police officers,
and that's why we're here today because we would love to see them do their job
properly. So I'll hand over to Aryan, who will read our submission, and then we'll
take some questions.
Welcome. Thank you so much. Well, as Nathan mentioned, Pillar holds that any
efforts to increase police's powers should not come in
any way at the cost of public trust in police,
or institutional accountability from police.
But ultimately, these powers should also not threaten civil and political rights,
as you've heard extensively today, and including of
particular
concern, the right to privacy, which also has implications on freedom of speech and
the right to assembly as well.
These new powers should not, in an ideal world, increase the
likelihood of overreach from police.
But as we believe it or as we see it, that's not the case with this bill.
And so as it stands, we don't support it in its current form.
There are two first principles which guide our concern, but also kind of
guide our recommendations in the end.
One is, as I've mentioned, trust in police, and then secondly,
the right to privacy. Firstly, when it comes to public trust, we believe that,
as Nathan said, police plays an incredibly important role in a functioning
liberal democracy as
the law enforcement. Pillar stands for protecting individual life, liberty, and
rights, and in an almost literal sense, that's what police do.
But police's ability to exercise this important function rests firmly
on a strong foundation of public trust.
But vaguely written legislation like the one before us that doesn't have public
buy-in gives police sweeping powers and plants the seeds for
future misconduct that will ultimately
erode trust in an institution that really does need a meaningful
restorationOf trust, given what we've seen in the past
years come out. So if you want to support our officers
and have an effective and trustworthy police force, our legislative
framework should be representative of this.
And as it stands, we think that it's not.
And secondly, the issue of privacy, the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act, Section 21,
as you've heard, the Privacy Act, and the corresponding 13 information
privacy principles form the basis for Kiwi's privacy rights.
This bill, effectively, as we see it at the moment in its current
wording, undermines these privacy protections.
There's no strong objective safeguards, and if anything,
there are threats to privacy as a result of this.
And again, as you've heard extensively from other
submitters, there's been reports from the IPCA, from the media, from the Office of
the Privacy Commissioner, and other civil rights advocacy organizations
speaking about police's breach of fundamental human rights in different
instances. And so concerns are not unfounded.
As currently worded, the bill gives police unrestricted powers to gather
information via recordings, with essentially no guidance
on where these recordings will be kept.
And also permitting police to hold information for an indefinite period of
time. In the age of facial recognition
technology and AI,
it makes access to essentially this biometric information
even more concerning or gives us cause for
caution.
The wording throughout Sections 45A to 45D
is broad, permits surveillance and data collection for almost any purpose that
police may consider useful, both now and into the
future, as you see within the bill's explanatory section as well.
Again, police could collect and make recordings of the public without certainty as
to why they even need that information in the first place.
That's kind of as it's laid out, because words like activity
or intelligence purposes are left undefined in the bill.
Police also have, as we see it, permission to collect information when on private
property without prior warrant.
That's Section 45C. The inclusion of catch-all provisions in
45AD and 45D that are intended to
provide protections show that the legislator has
some concern or admits that there's a necessity for
restriction. But the way that this is worded, it completely undermines any
intended constraint on data collection
from police.
As we see it, and as you would have seen from the Privacy Commissioner's
submission, we find that information privacy principles one, nine, ten, and
eleven are all specifically and essentially disregarded by this bill.
And we think that putting two items of legislation at odds with each
other, if this bill goes in its current form, and then we also have the Privacy
Act,
we undermine any desire to give police more operational
clarity if we have two pieces of legislation that essentially go
against each other. So as we see it, the safeguards are weak.
We don't have strong oversight, and we're limiting
meaningful opportunities to challenge and engage the police if the
bill passes in its current form, especially in an age
where information is power.
The capacity for the state to gather this much information, we think
should be
restricted and done proportionately.
So ultimately, we have
four key recommendations that are noted in the written submission, but that's
around titling the language that recordings should actually just require a
reasonable, non-speculative basis that the material being recorded will assist a
specific investigation or address an imminent
threat.
Removing the word activity or defining it, same with the word intelligence or
intelligence purposes as a phrase.
And as you've heard, providing some safeguards for children and young people.
And while slightly outside the bill's
remit, we think there should be
some discussion around
evidence management systems for the police to be able to actually use
information that they gather in the long term.
So those are our concerns, and those are the principles that
guide our concerns and recognition.
As it stands, we don't support the bill, although we understand the intention
behind it.
And yeah, we hope to see some approved amendments.
But with that, we're happy to take questions.
We've got a question from Dean Roswell. Yeah, thanks.
Just in paragraph nine, you mentioned operational clarity.
That's right.
Now, in the Police Association
submission, they saw this bill as a freedom.
You're seeing it through the lens of a concern.
And I suppose different districts, supervisors, and
teams may interpret necessary or reasonable-
Yeah
... differently. And operationally, I suppose, do
you think that the absence of clear limits in the
bill,
do you risk having inconsistent practices across
police districts, across supervisors?
And is that a concern for you?
Yeah, absolutely. The term subjective means that every
individual decides for themselves what is right or correct, and so
that's our concern. We appreciate that police do need some clarity as to what
they're doing. But having complete discretion with no safeguards
means that something might be happening in this district that's not happening in
this district.
And as I said, it just plants the seeds for future misconduct.
And broadly speaking, I think most police will do what
is right. But if we have these extremely broad
standards, there is a likelihood that somewhere in the future something will happen
that will just further reduce trust in an institution that actually needs
a restoration now.
Okay. So if we define that in the bill-
Yeah
... do you feel it'll make it easier for officers to operate confidently
Lawfully and consistently across the country?
More likely to.
Yeah.
More likely to-
Of course
... rather than not to.
I think what we have witnessed is a huge public failing of trust with the police,
and for good reason. And I see that police are crying out for more clarity.
I think we owe them that as the protectors of our society.
And if we can provide that through bills and legislation like this, we absolutely
should.
Just to sup on that, do you think that defining it in the bill or defining it in
regulation, where the minister of the time can make
changes, where do you feel the best place for that would be?
I think the difference is in putting a fence at the top of the cliff or an
ambulance at the bottom. If we can get this right from step one as opposed to step
three or four or five, we've seen how easy it is to pass the buck and kick the can
down the road, and it'll get sorted out in the legislative process.
Mm.
But if we start with good intention, but also good writing and good clarity, we
don't have to go back and fix these things later.
There's no further questions, but thank you.
Thank you.
The submission was very well laid out. But thank you very much for your time today.
Thank you so much.
Thanks.
Not quite sure if BIPOC,
Legal Collective Aotearoa, are they on-
They're coming up
... coming online?
Hello.
Welcome. I see Elizabeth is. Shaymaa, welcome to the Justice
Committee. We have you for 10 minutes today, but please take us
through your key points of your submission, and please leave some time for the
committee to ask some questions.
Tena koutou katoa. My name is Shaymaa Arab.
I appear before this committee as a human rights advocate and a member of the
Muslim community in Aotearoa and on behalf of the BIPOC Legal Collective
Aotearoa-
Welcome
... an organization creating the law and the communities it most affects.
I'm joined today by Elizabeth McLean, who's completing her PhD in psychology at
Victoria University, with a focus on young Māori and the justice system.
Elizabeth will speak to the psychological dimension of this bill after I've
addressed the legal arguments. So between us, we hope to cover not only what this
bill does to the law, but what it does to people.
As you know, the bill exists because police spent years unlawfully photographing
thousands of people, predominantly Māori teenagers, storing those images in a
national intelligence database with no oversight, no defined purpose, and
no deletion framework. A joint investigation by the
IPCA and the Privacy Commissioner found that.
And last year, the Supreme Court confirmed that it was an unreasonable search and
in breach of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act.
For us, that should've been a moment of reckoning and reflection, but instead, this
bill proposes to make that conduct lawful by statute, and in doing
so, it authorizes what the court found unlawful.
First, I'd like to talk about the intelligence purpose threshold.
The bill authorizes the collection of audio and visual information where a police
officer considers it will or may support a policing function for, quote-unquote,
"intelligence purpose." That phrase is not defined in the bill, and there's no
requirement for reasonable grounds, no requirement for a connection to a specific
investigation, and no objective standard of any kind.
We already know that the Privacy Commissioner has said that it sets a low bar, and
the information privacy principles under the Privacy Act require that information
is collected for a lawful purpose, that it is relevant, and that the collection is
not excessive. An undefined intelligence purpose that requires only a
police officer's subjective belief is difficult to reconcile with any of those
requirements.
In the Supreme Court, they were clear.
Collecting photographs for speculative future intelligence use without a specific
lawful purpose breached Section 21 of the Bill of Rights Act.
So this bill doesn't really respond to that reasoning. It legislates around it.
And we're asking this committee to recommend an objective, articulable standard,
one that requires reasonable grounds connected to a specific policing function
before information can be collected.
And that's not really a radical ask because that's what the Supreme Court's own
reasoning requires.
Second, which is really important, is about racial bias.
As I mentioned before, this bill didn't arise in a vacuum.
It arose because police were systematically and unlawfully photographing Māori
rangatahi, and that practice was unfortunately institutionally
tolerated for many years. The UPD research program found that
police are 11% more likely to prosecute Māori than New Zealand Europeans for the
very same offense. So this shows us that it's a structural pattern and not an
anomaly. New Zealand does have obligations under international law that are
directly engaged here, and these obligations can't be satisfied by good intentions.
They require structural safeguards, which this bill unfortunately doesn't really
have any. There's no requirement to collect or publish disaggregated
demographic data on who is photographed or recorded.
There's no independent audit mechanism, and there's no oversight body.
There is only the same internal police review that failed to catch the original
conduct in the first place.
If this bill passes without those safeguards, we won't know who's being
targeted. We won't be able to identify discriminatory patterns until the harm is
already done. What's missing is proactive systemic oversight.
Sys- yeah, systemic oversight. An oversight, like an independent body with
authority to audit how these powers are being used across the board with public
demographic reporting, so patterns of discriminatory targeting can be
identified before another generation of rangatahi ends up in a database.
So we are asking this committee to require
mandatory public reporting of this demographic data
and to establish an independent oversight mechanism with real authority to audit
how these powers are being exercised.
The third issue I want to raise is one that received a little attention, but I'm
glad it was mentioned today, and that is on facial recognition.
And this could potentially carry significant long-term risk.
In Tamifuna, the Supreme Court specifically noted that photographs are sensitive
biometric information precisely because they are capable of being
analyzed using facial recognition technology.
As a previous speaker said, this is why photographic data is categorically
different from a name or an address.
Once an image is in a database, it can be run against facial recognition systems
indefinitely. So what that means is you collect today, but you identify, track, and
surveil tomorrow. So we are asking that this committee not create a
statutory collection power, and at a minimum, the bill does need to explicitly
address facial recognition. And we also recommend that the bill explicitly
address where collected biometric information can be shared and with whom,
including under intelligence-sharing arrangements with foreign
governments.This is one, the fourth issue is
one that I believe is really, really important for communities of color,
and one that has received far less scrutiny than part one, and that is on the
closure powers.
As you know, it extends to parks and public spaces on a single police officer's
subjective view that disorder may be imminent,
and that threshold is quite low. For the communities we represent, it's not
abstract. Look at Eid prayers, for example, where this draws thousands of Muslim
community members, families, women, children into public spaces.
These are peaceful, lawful gatherings.
Under this bill, if a police officer formed the view that disorder might be
imminent nearby, that gathering could be declared a closure zone.
Attendees who don't immediately leave could be fined or even face criminal
charges. Those closure zone powers don't exist in isolation.
They feed directly into the surveillance framework I already mentioned.
A gathering declared a closure zone becomes a gathering of interest, and the people
present could become subjects of intelligence collection.
So one power enables another. And I'd like to say that this is not a hypothetical
concern for Muslim communities. The Royal Commission of Inquiry has already stated
that there has been over-surveillance of Muslim communities.
And just recently as well,
over the last three years, another case of a young Muslim who attended a lawful
public protest was contacted by the police, and his social
media was referenced, and that caused a lot of fear amongst the community.
I will pass it on to Lizzie, just because I know
we're running short of time, to talk about the psychological dimension.
Thank you. You've still got another four minutes, so fine. Thank you.
Thanks, Shay. Tena koutou katoa. He uri tēnei nō Waikato,
Tainui, Ngāti Maniapoto me Ngāti Pūkenga hoki.
Ko Elizabeth Kararaina McLean ahau.
Today, I just want to really briefly touch on
what legal arguments alone cannot fully capture, and that's just the impact that
this bill could have on people, the psychological impact.
And we're not talking about in a hypothetical what if scenario
or too far in the future. I'm talking about the impact that we could see
now if this was introduced. I want to speak to this coming from the context
of knowing that we already have young people and marginalized communities
navigating a justice system that does not necessarily treat them
equally. So the evidence available to us on surveillance is clear.
You do not need to be watched
to be affected by watching. When young people know
they are being photographed or are possibly going to be photographed,
and that this data will be stored somewhere, they will change their
behavior. They will avoid public spaces, disengage from the
community, and effectively withdraw from certain aspects of civic
life. We call this the chilling effect, and this is a well-known psychological
phenomenon that arises when individuals or groups modify their
behavior due to a fear of the consequences that may
result from this behavior being observed.
And now this is well documented across multiple jurisdictions and in various
contexts.
So with respect to our rangatahi Māori, we're already dealing with a justice system
that is not designed to support them.
There's substantial evidence illustrating legal cynicism amongst our rangatahi
Māori, and when this belief becomes so entrenched during
adolescence or during
the youngest stages in their lives, it can be incredibly difficult to shift
that way of thinking. This, in turn, will influence how our young
people are engaging with the justice system or justice institutes in
terms of whether or not they're likely to report criminal behavior, whether or not
they're likely to engage in support or even reach out for support,
and whether or not they'd choose to engage with justice institutes at all.
This proposed legislation is a direct result of unlawfully photographing
rangatahi Māori. There's a real psychological cost in place to
being treated as a suspect without cause, particularly during
adolescence, an incredibly important time in one's life for
developing a sense of identity and a real sense of self.
This sort of encounter can be really detrimental to not only how
someone sees themselves, but also how they make sense of their relationships
with authority figures and the law in general.
I believe it should be deeply concerning to all of us that if this bill is
introduced, we would only be further entrenching ourselves in a justice
system that is doing harm to marginalized communities.
But also that we'd be normalizing this idea that government surveillance and
information gathering on these communities is okay.
This bill would be telling our young people in the communities that the law has
taken into consideration the context within which they exist and
decided that surveillance without a divine purpose is an acceptable
way to engage with them. I urge you all to consider not only if this bill
is legally defensible, but also whether or not it is in the best interests,
psychologically speaking, for those communities it's going to affect the most.
Nga mihi nui kia koutou. I'm going to hand back to Shaymaa.
Thank you.
Got that. I'll just kind of end it by saying that the Police
Association today mentioned trust and that there should be trust in police to
handle this appropriately.
I'd really like to touch on that because effective policing does depend on
community cooperation, and it depends on people reporting crime, providing
evidence, and trusting that the law works for them as much as it works on them.
But that trust is already really fragile, and the 2024 Crime
and Victim Survey found Māori have consistently lower trust and confidence in the
justice system than non-Māori. And I recall personally when the
15th of March terrorist attacks happened, there was a lot of effort to try and get
the Muslim community to report cases of hate crimes to police because for years,
there was weakened trust and little confidence that police would work with the
community rather than against them.
So the question for this committee is not only whether this bill is legally sound,
it's whether this actually does make New Zealand safer, and whether we should be
investing in potentially other initiatives to build this trust between the
community and the police. And just finally to close off, I'll be
very honest with this committee. The people that are most impacted and affected by
this bill aren't in this room with us.
They are Māori teenagers, they are children of color, they are whānau at Friday
prayers. They're communities who have learned through experience not to assume that
the law protects them. So I do appear before you as an advocate and as a
member of one of those communities because these things are not separate for me.
They're why this work matters, and why I stand behind every one of those arguments.
So I just really hope that the committee does take these recommendations into
consideration, and that they also oppose this
bill.No, I'm hearing you.
Thank you very much, Shamara Elizabeth.
I just see if there's any questions or good-- I'll probably just
ask you, you did bring up around mandatory
public reporting. Shouldn't it be for
all age groups? Like it should, whatever's done here, and I think you're
advocating obviously around children and pictures.
But
I'd just like a little bit more detail on your thinking there.
So sorry, can you talk about the-
Oh, yeah, the mandatory public reporting you were talking
about.
Oh, yes. Mm-hmm.
Yes. So shouldn't that be for all age groups?
Yeah.
Shouldn't just be for-
Absolutely.
Yes.
So, my point there, sorry, just to clarify, is that, any data on
intelligence gathering should be reported, shouldn't just be based on one specific
ethnicity or demographic. But that will make it clearer what demographics are
potentially being targeted. But there should be a lot more transparency with
anybody who's being surveilled.
Thank you very much. Thank you for the submission.
Very clear submission, and thank you for your time today.
No, Henry. Thank you.
All right.
Thank you.
Thank you. Our last submitter today is the Child, Children's
Commissioner in person. Claire, welcome.
We have, as a committee, already decided to give you some little bit extra time,
so you're with us for at least 15 minutes, maybe longer if we've got a few
questions, but welcome.
Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
Claire Achmad,
the
Children's Commissioner. I'm the independent statutory advocate
for all children in New Zealand under the age of 18, and all
children and young people under the age of 25 who have been in or who
are in the care and/or custody of the state.
I had very much hoped to have some young people alongside
me today to present to you on this bill.
As you know, it's always my intention as Children's Commissioner to share the
platform that I have as an advocate with children and young
people so that they are supported to directly share their
views with you as decision-makers at the system level.
Unfortunately, despite best efforts, I wasn't able to make that happen today.
However, given how this bill will directly impact
the lives and rights of mokopuna, New Zealand's children and
young people, it is essential that their voices and
views are sought out and understood by you as parliamentary
decision-makers to inform your views and your ultimately
recommendations to the Parliament about this bill.
Ideally, mokopuna should have been consulted on this bill prior
to it landing before the Parliament.
Seeing as that has not occurred, I ask you directly,
collectively as the Justice Committee, that you please seek out
children and young people's views on this bill.
And if I can be of any assistance in doing so, I will-
Yeah, that was gonna be my question
... of course, be happy to assist you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
As Children's Commissioner, I oppose this bill because of the
significant concerns that it raises from a
children's rights perspective.
You obviously have my written submission, which goes into more
technicalities and more detail.
Today, with my time with you, I want to highlight the key
reasons for my opposition to this bill so that they are well understood,
and the approaches that I am advocating for from a children's rights
perspective.
From a children's rights perspective, the right to
privacy is central to this bill.
All mokopuna in all circumstances have the right
to privacy, including in their interactions with
police and with other apparatus of the state.
Article 16 (1) of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child,
to which New Zealand is a state party, could not be any
clearer. It reads, "No child shall be
subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference
with their privacy."
And Article 16 (2) of the Children's Convention further
makes clear that the child has the right to the protection of the
law against such interference.
The right to privacy in police interactions is important
for all people, including children and young people.
This is because we are talking about a significant
exercise of the power of the state.
And in comparison with a child or a young person, that
exercise of power and the imbalance of power is even more
pronounced.
Children and young people may be vulnerable in such instances to
breaches of their rights.
The way in which personal information is collected
from mokopuna by police and how it is
used and retained in the context of the criminal justice
system can have profound negative and
sometimes lifelong impacts for mokopuna beyond the
breaching of their rights.
The information privacy principles enshrined in the Privacy Act
must be upheld at all times, including Principle
One relating to the purpose of collection and Principle Four
about the manner of collection.
I have read the Privacy Commissioner's submission on this bill,
and I am concerned that this bill, in effect, will
override the information privacy principles.
That must be avoided. Principle Four makes absolutely
clear that special care and protections are required when
it comes to the manner of how personal information is
collected from children.
As the committee will well knowIn 2022, the
Independent Police Conduct Authority and the Office of the Privacy
Commissioner undertook this joint inquiry,
and it found that police were collecting personal
information from mokopuna unlawfully.
Crucially, the joint inquiry also found the collection of
personal information was a breach of the rights of
children and young people.
As Children's Commissioner, let me be absolutely clear with you
today.
The findings of the joint inquiry were not an invitation
to pass a law to get around unlawful practice that
police had been engaged in.
Instead, the joint inquiry sent a crystal clear
message
that police practice of collecting personal information,
including from children and young people, must be
consistent with their rights.
This bill goes against those recommendations.
The government is obliged in all instances to uphold the rights of
children under the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, including
to privacy, non-discrimination, and particular rights when
they are in conflict with the law. Those are protected by Article 40
of the convention.
This includes Article 47, and it says that
states' parties to the convention shall ensure a child's
privacy is fully respected at all
stages of criminal proceedings.
I'm very concerned to see this bill before the parliament
without adequate safeguards to protect children's rights
directly built into it.
As I've noted, there is a significant
power imbalance between mokopuna and police in
situations where police want to collect personal
information from mokopuna, including photographs
of them, videos of them, and sound recordings.
In practice, I am mindful that the collection of
photos, videos, and voice recordings of mokopuna
outside of a current active investigation is also
likely to generate a sense of mistrust and
even conflict with mokopuna, who will understandably, I
think, feel unfairly targeted and perhaps surveilled
by police in these circumstances.
This will be especially harmful for mokopuna Māori.
Collectively, I believe we want trust and
confidence between mokopuna, whānau, and police
to be further built and developed, not undermined.
The powers in Part 1 of this bill are so broadly
framed as they currently stand that they are
inconsistent with New Zealand's obligations under the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child.
I remind you that as members of Parliament, you are duty bearers
under the Children's Convention, and I implore you to examine
this bill with that in mind.
In my view, this bill must not proceed in its current form,
because to do so will mean a law on our books that
opens the door to police abuse of power,
and in doing so, open that door to the breach of the rights of
children.
This must be avoided. Their right to privacy must be
upheld through ensuring effective and clear
safeguards are in place.
I further note that the bill is inconsistent with the Crown's Te Tiriti o
Waitangi obligations as made clear in the articles of Te
Tiriti. Upholding kāwanatanga requires the Crown
to exercise good governance in respect of the criminal justice system,
including addressing and reducing the disproportionate
representation of mokopuna Māori.
Tino rangatiratanga means mokopuna have the right to retain control
of when their personal information is collected and how it is used.
For mokopuna Māori, personal information is their own taonga,
which the Crown must support them to protect.
For these reasons, there must be high thresholds and
clear parameters and age-specific
safeguards for the limited circumstances when police
can lawfully collect personal information from mokopuna.
The bill currently contains none of these things, which is
why I am so concerned about it.
I also remain seriously concerned that the bill will
disproportionately impact those mokopuna who
already experience significant inequities within the
youth justice system. This includes mokopuna Māori, tangata
whenua Māori in particular.
The joint inquiry of the IPCA and the OPC found that
53% of personal information collected by police
of those under the age of 18 was personal
information belonging to mokopuna Māori.
Pacific mokopuna, mokopuna whaikaha, those with disabilities,
and those with a care experience in the care of the state
also experience inequities within our youth justice system.
I strongly caution against the implementation of this bill in its
current form because it is likely to perpetuate
existing inequities.
If this bill is to progress, I suggest it is
significantly strengthened to safeguard the rights of
children and young people.
I do accept that there are some legitimate
policing purposes to collect and use personal
information from mokopunaSuch as when there is an active
investigation into a crime, or in limited
circumstances when collection is necessary to prevent
harm.
However, I am very clear, this bill should not proceed
in its current form when it comes to a children's rights perspective.
If it is to progress, I strongly recommend that clear
legislated safeguards for children's rights are explicitly
written into the bill to ensure any and all collection
of personal information upholds children's rights.
The situations highlighted in the joint IPCA and
OPC inquiry must be learned from, and
the same mistakes in the exercise and abuse of state
power must be avoided.
The joint inquiry was clear about what these safeguards should
be. And from a children's rights perspective, as I have set
out in my written submission, safeguards should ensure
including, that the information privacy principles
are always applied and upheld when it comes to the rights of
mokopuna, and that police comply with these when seeking to
collect, use, and retain personal information from
mokopuna. Very happy to take any questions.
Thank you. Very strong submission there. Dean Roswell.
Yeah, thank you for that. And just referring to your recommendations, some of
the advice that we've received suggests that children's safeguards can be
largely dealt with through police operational policy
rather than the bill itself. And based on what you've seen in the past,
why is relying on police policy and guidance not
sufficient when children's rights are at stake?
The findings of this joint inquiry make that absolutely
clear.
We simply can't rely on guidance
to ensure that children's rights are upheld.
The fact is that children's rights were breached by the
police in the collection of their personal information.
And so that is why I'm so clear that this bill, if it is to
proceed, must explicitly legislate those
protections into it. There's no excuse to not do
so, and to not do so will go against the
recommendations of this inquiry, and it will go against our
obligations as a nation under the Children's Convention.
So there's an opportunity now to get this right if it is going to
proceed, to make those protections and safeguards
crystal clear within the law so that no one is under
any confusion about the ways in which police
must uphold the rights of mokopuna if they are collecting their
personal information, retaining it, and using it.
Thank you.
Okay, can I just delve into your expertise
around the Children's Convention and internationally?
And can you,
without putting you too much on the spotlight, international examples of where this
is done well?
Hmm. I think that there are examples in other countries
that
we see the Children's Convention having been fully
incorporated-
Mm
... into domestic law. So an example of that is in Scotland.
A few years ago, the Scottish Parliament,
I think pretty much by a strong consensus, passed a
law which actually incorporated the Children's Convention
into Scottish law.
That is a really important step that is still open
to New Zealand to do, and I urge that we do go down that
track, because what that means then is that there is no
room for movement in terms of any confusion around
whether or not we should be upholding those rights.
So that
incorporation is a really full-scale way to
ensure children's rights are upheld in a
state.
In New Zealand, we have some partial incorporation of the Children's
Convention. For example, in the Oranga Tamariki Act, some of
the principles of the convention are infused into
that law. And so arguably, New Zealand should always be
upholding children's rights in all circumstances.
But we do see that because we don't have that full incorporation, we
end up in situations like this where laws come before the
parliament that are inconsistent with a children's rights
approach. We want to be avoiding that.
And so in the meantime, before we go to that state of
incorporation,
as a parliament, you have the opportunity to
ensure that explicit safeguards grounded in
children's rights are enshrined into these kinds of laws
that would have a detrimental impact on the rights of children.
Thank you for that. It fully answers that. Carl, did you have anything online? No.
So thank you very much. We took you a little bit over time, but thank you very
much for a very full session today.
Thank you.
Appreciate it.
I'm going to ask anyone that isn't a
official to leave the room and anyone who's working on the
bill with us if they could just remain for a
moment.
Do I need to move to private?